README.md, before:

<img
src="https://rawgithub.com/Kappa-Dev/KaSim/master/man/img/KaSim-Logo.svg"
alt="KaSim logo" title="Stochastic Kappa Simulator" align="right" height="90"/>
# KappaTools

[![Build Status](https://github.com/Kappa-Dev/KappaTools/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/Kappa-Dev/KappaTools/actions/workflows/ci.yml?query=branch%3Amaster)
[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/Kappa-Dev/KaSim](https://badges.gitter.im/Kappa-Dev/KaSim.svg)](https://gitter.im/Kappa-Dev/KaSim?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

KaSim is a stochastic simulator for rule-based models written in Kappa. KaSa is
a static analyser for Kappa models.

Kappy is a python library to launch and analyse runs and outputs of
Kappa models.


## Quick startup

If you are new to Kappa, the easiest way to start experimenting with it is using the webapp.

<p align="center">
<img alt="Editor screenshot with contact map" src="./dev/screenshots/editor1.png" width="45%">
<img alt= "Plot screenshot" src="./dev/screenshots/plot.png" width="45%">
</p>
<p align="center">
<img alt="Editor screenshot with contact map 2" src="./dev/screenshots/editor2.png" width="45%">
<img alt="Stories screenshot" src="./dev/screenshots/story.png" width="45%">
</p>


It's available [directly in your browser](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/try/?model=https%3A//raw.githubusercontent.com/Kappa-Dev/KappaTools/master/examples/abc.ka),
or for more performance as a downloadable [electron app](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/nightly-builds/), available for MacOS, Windows and Linux.

Kappa tools are also available as Command-Line Interface programs, which you can either build following the [instructions below](#core-tools),
or find the binaries included with the [electron app](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/nightly-builds/) in subdir `resources/bin`.

If you would like to use python to interact with the Kappa tools, the `kappy` lib is where to look. Here's an example of its usage with `ipython`

```python
In [2]: import kappy

In [3]: model_text = "%agent: A(x)\nA(x[.]), A(x[.]) <-> A(x[1]), A(x[1]) @ 1e-2,1\n%plot: |A(x[.])|\n%init: 100 A()"

In [4]: kappa_client = kappy.KappaStd()

In [5]: kappa_client.add_model_string(model_text)
Out[5]: [...]

In [6]: kappa_client.project_parse()
Out[6]: [...]

In [7]: kappa_client.simulation_start(kappy.SimulationParameter(.1,"[T] > 10"))
Out[7]: {'simulation_artifact_simulation_seed': 297327779}

In [8]: kappa_client.wait_for_simulation_stop()
Out[8]: [...]

In [9]: kappa_client.simulation_plot()
Out[9]:
  [6.7, 48.0],
[...]
  [0.4, 60.0],
  [0.3, 50.0],
  [0.2, 64.0],
  [0.1, 62.0],
  [0.0, 100.0]]}
```

See the [install instructions](#kappy) to start using kappy.


## User manual
See [documentation page on kappalanguage.org](https://kappalanguage.org/documentation).

Kappy [API
documentation is online](https://kasim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/kappy.html).

The latex sources of the "older" reference manual (and KaSa one) are
available in the `man/` directory. To compile the manuel, in addition of
a decent LaTeX distribution you need
[gnuplot](http://www.gnuplot.info/) and
[graphviz](http://www.graphviz.org/) to generate images (make sure
that `dot` is in the PATH of your OS). To generate the pdf of the
manual type

`make doc`

## Installation

### Core tools

[Released versions](https://github.com/Kappa-Dev/KaSim/releases) come with
binaries for MacOS, Windows and Debian derivatives (as Ubuntu). [Nightly
builds](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/nightly-builds/) of the master branch
are built for these platforms by the continuous integration tools.

If you want or need your own build,
 - Install [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html) (the OCaml
   package manager) and initialize it (by issuing `opam init`)
 - In the source directory, install all the dependencies by `opam install 
   --deps-only pinned_libs/default` if your OS is OSX or linux, or `opam 
   install --deps-only pinned_libs/windows` if your OS is Windows.
 - `dune build`

You can be more fine grained if you only need the command-line tools
(and therefore could install less dependencies) by doing `opam install
--deps-only kappa-binaries` followed by `make all`

If nothing worked for you so far. Well, you're pretty much on your
own... Kappa tools depend upon the OCaml native compiler version
4.05.0 or above as well as _dune_, _findlib_, _Lwt_ (>= 2.6.0), _Re_,
_Fmt_, _Logs_ and _Yojson_ libraries. Find any way to install them and
you'll be only a `make all` away from getting Kappa binaries...

### Kappy

You should be able to `pip install kappy`.

- Under MacOS and linux (and if you're not using a python version so
  cutting edge that we haven't notice its release yet), _wheels_ that
  contain the core binaries should be available.
- For other platforms/python versions, you need to get kappa agents by
  yourself thanks to the *opam* package manager by `opam install
  kappa-binaries kappa-agents` (or use an externaly hosted REST API)
- In order to develop in kappy and run all its tests, you need to
  follow the "get your own build section" above as well as install
  _requests_ (and _future_).

## Usage

### KaSim

In order to run a simulation for 100 time units printing observables values
every 0.5 time unit, type

`bin/KaSim kappa_file_1 ... kappa_file_n -l 100 -p 0.5 -o data_file`

This will produce a data file of 200 point containing the
trajectory that was produced during the simulation.

Type:

`bin/KaSim --help`

for a complete list of options.

### Kappy

Do:

```python
import kappy
client = kappy.KappaStd()
```

to get a kappa client that uses a kappa agent installed locally. Add a
string argument specifing the `path/to/KaSimAgent` to use a specific agent.

A minimal example of usage is:

```python
model = "\
%agent: A(x[x.A]) \
%var: n_0 100 \
%var: k_on 1e-2 \
'rule' A(x[.]), A(x[.]) <-> A(x[1]), A(x[1]) @ k_on, 1 \
%plot: |A(x[.])| \
%init: n_0 A()"
client.add_model_string(model)
client.project_parse()
sim_params = kappy.SimulationParameter(pause_condition="[T] > 100",plot_period=1)
client.simulation_start(sim_params)
client.wait_for_simulation_stop()
results = client.simulation_plot()
client.simulation_delete()
# Rerun with some overwritten values for algebraic variables
client.project_parse(k_on=5e-2,n_0=500)
client.simulation_start(sim_params)
client.wait_for_simulation_stop()
results' = client.simulation_plot()
client.shutdown()
```

## Tests

Launch the core/integration tests by `make check`.

Regenerate the reference files if you've changed something in the
outputs by `make build-tests`

Launch python tests by `nosetests` (after having followed the "Get
your own build" section).

Commit message:

Added short description in README.md

README.md, after:

# Kappa extension: state variables

This repository is a clone of [Kappa](https://github.com/Kappa-Dev/KappaTools/).

It contains an extension to the Kappa language: state variables. In rules, where states
can appear, the extension also allows state variables of the form ?x, where x is an identifier.


The semantics is that a state variable can bound to any state as long as the same variables in the rule are bound to the same state. The state variable's scope is always the rule it appears in.

The current prototype implementation is a standalone new executable, KaStateVar. KaStateVar reads an extended kappa source file (with state variables) from the standard input, expands the rules containing state variables into multiple kappa rules that do not contain state variables but instead specify the states explicitely, and prints the resulting kappa file to the standard output. It requires agent signature declarations to enumerate all states.

The rest of this readme is from the original Kappa documentation. Please use the arious Kappa tools from the original repository, as this is an experimental clone that may change them.

<img
src="https://rawgithub.com/Kappa-Dev/KaSim/master/man/img/KaSim-Logo.svg"
alt="KaSim logo" title="Stochastic Kappa Simulator" align="right" height="90"/>
# KappaTools

[![Build Status](https://github.com/Kappa-Dev/KappaTools/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/Kappa-Dev/KappaTools/actions/workflows/ci.yml?query=branch%3Amaster)
[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/Kappa-Dev/KaSim](https://badges.gitter.im/Kappa-Dev/KaSim.svg)](https://gitter.im/Kappa-Dev/KaSim?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

KaSim is a stochastic simulator for rule-based models written in Kappa. KaSa is
a static analyser for Kappa models.

Kappy is a python library to launch and analyse runs and outputs of
Kappa models.


## Quick startup

If you are new to Kappa, the easiest way to start experimenting with it is using the webapp.

<p align="center">
<img alt="Editor screenshot with contact map" src="./dev/screenshots/editor1.png" width="45%">
<img alt= "Plot screenshot" src="./dev/screenshots/plot.png" width="45%">
</p>
<p align="center">
<img alt="Editor screenshot with contact map 2" src="./dev/screenshots/editor2.png" width="45%">
<img alt="Stories screenshot" src="./dev/screenshots/story.png" width="45%">
</p>


It's available [directly in your browser](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/try/?model=https%3A//raw.githubusercontent.com/Kappa-Dev/KappaTools/master/examples/abc.ka),
or for more performance as a downloadable [electron app](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/nightly-builds/), available for MacOS, Windows and Linux.

Kappa tools are also available as Command-Line Interface programs, which you can either build following the [instructions below](#core-tools),
or find the binaries included with the [electron app](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/nightly-builds/) in subdir `resources/bin`.

If you would like to use python to interact with the Kappa tools, the `kappy` lib is where to look. Here's an example of its usage with `ipython`

```python
In [2]: import kappy

In [3]: model_text = "%agent: A(x)\nA(x[.]), A(x[.]) <-> A(x[1]), A(x[1]) @ 1e-2,1\n%plot: |A(x[.])|\n%init: 100 A()"

In [4]: kappa_client = kappy.KappaStd()

In [5]: kappa_client.add_model_string(model_text)
Out[5]: [...]

In [6]: kappa_client.project_parse()
Out[6]: [...]

In [7]: kappa_client.simulation_start(kappy.SimulationParameter(.1,"[T] > 10"))
Out[7]: {'simulation_artifact_simulation_seed': 297327779}

In [8]: kappa_client.wait_for_simulation_stop()
Out[8]: [...]

In [9]: kappa_client.simulation_plot()
Out[9]:
  [6.7, 48.0],
[...]
  [0.4, 60.0],
  [0.3, 50.0],
  [0.2, 64.0],
  [0.1, 62.0],
  [0.0, 100.0]]}
```

See the [install instructions](#kappy) to start using kappy.


## User manual
See [documentation page on kappalanguage.org](https://kappalanguage.org/documentation).

Kappy [API
documentation is online](https://kasim.readthedocs.io/en/latest/kappy.html).

The latex sources of the "older" reference manual (and KaSa one) are
available in the `man/` directory. To compile the manuel, in addition of
a decent LaTeX distribution you need
[gnuplot](http://www.gnuplot.info/) and
[graphviz](http://www.graphviz.org/) to generate images (make sure
that `dot` is in the PATH of your OS). To generate the pdf of the
manual type

`make doc`

## Installation

### Core tools

[Released versions](https://github.com/Kappa-Dev/KaSim/releases) come with
binaries for MacOS, Windows and Debian derivatives (as Ubuntu). [Nightly
builds](https://tools.kappalanguage.org/nightly-builds/) of the master branch
are built for these platforms by the continuous integration tools.

If you want or need your own build,
 - Install [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html) (the OCaml
   package manager) and initialize it (by issuing `opam init`)
 - In the source directory, install all the dependencies by `opam install 
   --deps-only pinned_libs/default` if your OS is OSX or linux, or `opam 
   install --deps-only pinned_libs/windows` if your OS is Windows.
 - `dune build`

You can be more fine grained if you only need the command-line tools
(and therefore could install less dependencies) by doing `opam install
--deps-only kappa-binaries` followed by `make all`

If nothing worked for you so far. Well, you're pretty much on your
own... Kappa tools depend upon the OCaml native compiler version
4.05.0 or above as well as _dune_, _findlib_, _Lwt_ (>= 2.6.0), _Re_,
_Fmt_, _Logs_ and _Yojson_ libraries. Find any way to install them and
you'll be only a `make all` away from getting Kappa binaries...

### Kappy

You should be able to `pip install kappy`.

- Under MacOS and linux (and if you're not using a python version so
  cutting edge that we haven't notice its release yet), _wheels_ that
  contain the core binaries should be available.
- For other platforms/python versions, you need to get kappa agents by
  yourself thanks to the *opam* package manager by `opam install
  kappa-binaries kappa-agents` (or use an externaly hosted REST API)
- In order to develop in kappy and run all its tests, you need to
  follow the "get your own build section" above as well as install
  _requests_ (and _future_).

## Usage

### KaSim

In order to run a simulation for 100 time units printing observables values
every 0.5 time unit, type

`bin/KaSim kappa_file_1 ... kappa_file_n -l 100 -p 0.5 -o data_file`

This will produce a data file of 200 point containing the
trajectory that was produced during the simulation.

Type:

`bin/KaSim --help`

for a complete list of options.

### Kappy

Do:

```python
import kappy
client = kappy.KappaStd()
```

to get a kappa client that uses a kappa agent installed locally. Add a
string argument specifing the `path/to/KaSimAgent` to use a specific agent.

A minimal example of usage is:

```python
model = "\
%agent: A(x[x.A]) \
%var: n_0 100 \
%var: k_on 1e-2 \
'rule' A(x[.]), A(x[.]) <-> A(x[1]), A(x[1]) @ k_on, 1 \
%plot: |A(x[.])| \
%init: n_0 A()"
client.add_model_string(model)
client.project_parse()
sim_params = kappy.SimulationParameter(pause_condition="[T] > 100",plot_period=1)
client.simulation_start(sim_params)
client.wait_for_simulation_stop()
results = client.simulation_plot()
client.simulation_delete()
# Rerun with some overwritten values for algebraic variables
client.project_parse(k_on=5e-2,n_0=500)
client.simulation_start(sim_params)
client.wait_for_simulation_stop()
results' = client.simulation_plot()
client.shutdown()
```

## Tests

Launch the core/integration tests by `make check`.

Regenerate the reference files if you've changed something in the
outputs by `make build-tests`

Launch python tests by `nosetests` (after having followed the "Get
your own build" section).
